THE GNOSTIC JUNG AND THE SEVEN SERMONS TO THE DEAD
STEPHAN A HOELLER 1982
PROLOGUE
PREMONITION OF AN INESCAPABLE WORLD OF SHADOWS

the year was 1949. a deep covering of snow obscured the outline of the splendid baroque buildings in the old city of innsbruck. the venerable capital of the land of the tyrol seemed depopulated by the grim force of the alpine winter. the wide avenue named after the empress maria theresia, beloved matriarch of a long-vanished united states of eastern europe, was empty of its afternoon strollers, who had fled the elements to find shelter where they could. shelter, especially of the heated variety, was in poor supply to be sure. the scarcity of heating materials left most public and many private buildings without heat. even the historic chambers of Innsbruck's famous university housed shivering masses of heavily clad students huddled around professors whose learning was exceeded only by their discomfort. greengrocers dispiritedly offered their all-too-small store of frostbitten vegetables for sale, while the moroccan spahis and senegalese infantrymen of the french occupational army vociferously cursed the day when their generals decided to station them in this land of snow and ice. happy indeed was the man, the woman, or the child who found it possible to repair to a heated room on a day like this.

on a small side street of the inner city, two hatted, overcoated and scarved figures were speedily betaking themselves to just such a place of blessedness in the shape of the public reading room maintained for the intellectual enrichment - and incidentally, or not so incidentally, for the physical comfort - of the population by the information service of the united states of america. there, in the midst of books and periodicals printed in several languages, all bearing the ideals of the richest and most generous of the four occupational powers, weary and cold refugees from the tyrolean winter gathered with great frequency. the two figures here referred to were refugees, not only from the elements, but from other, more enduring forms of adversity as well. they were refugees from their nearby homeland, hungary, who had come to reside, even though temporarily, in the sister country, the austrian imperial homeland of the many peoples of eastern europe. the elder of the two compatriots was of singularly impressive appearance and of equally impressive credentials in the fields of learning, religion and public life. professor j. was a priest of the roman catholic church, and until recently a member of the jesuit order, which he relinquished with the official approval of the church, while retaining his priestly status. for many years he was known as one of the outstanding luminaries of the academic world of his hungarian university. he was the author of numerous learned books on philosophy, and a recognized expert on existentialism, personally acquainted with heidegger, jaspers, and jean paul sartre. in 1945 his name was one of several nominated for the leading archbishopric of hungary, which entailed the leadership of the church of the entire nation, but he was by-passed in favor of the heroic and tragic prelate, cardinal mindszenty, whose imprisonment scandalized the entire world just a few brief years later. at this time professor j. was living in quiet semi-retirement in austria, an austere and mysterious figure, known to but a few of his countrymen and having personal contact with even fewer. one of the elect whom he conversed with regularly was his present companion on his wintry walk, a young and precocious student of philosophy with aspirations toward entering the priesthood. this young man - none other than the writer of the present treatise - had strangely arrested the attention of the reclusive professor who seemed to be amused by his great attraction to religion, coupled with unconventional thinking and youthful flamboyance. "i like you, my young baron," he said on their first meeting; "in an earlier age you might have become a real heretic and would have been burned by the dominicans!" these promising opening remarks led to a friendship, punctuated by almost daily meetings at the reading room of the american library, and on rare occasions of momentary prosperity at a nearby cafe, over turkish coffee and french cognac.
"we may have a treat for you this afternoon," the professor said to his companion. "a strange book is on its way to us that will assuredly interest you."
"a strange book? of what content and authorship?"
"i am told it concerns your old friends, the gnostic heretics, whom you never cease to rave about - and moreover it was written by another man you are interested in, the redoubtable dr. jung."
"the swiss psychologist, who lives across the mountains from here, and who is reputed to be a regular wizard in the good old tradition of witches and alchemists?" the young man asked, not without some excitement.
"the very same. the 'hexenmeister' [warlock] of zurich himself."

the intriguing news thus having been announced by the professor, the two frostbitten travelers entered the reading room, and after shedding their snow-covered overgarments, settled comfortably down to a large and suitably deserted table in the far end of the room. the austrian girl librarian reverently curtsied to the "hochwurdiger herr" [reverend gentleman] in her accustomed fashion, while depositiong several publications of the professor's usual reading material before him. the two companions enveloped themselves in an etheric cloud of quiet and scholarly comfort, greatly augmented by the pleasant warmth of the room, so generously heated by the funds of the marshall plan. an hour passed

the opening of the door and the excited whispers of the librarian heralded the arrival of the expected bearer of heretical and psychological wonders, who - according to professor j. - was to join them in their present shelter. they were approached by a small, rather unprepossessing individual whose two unusual characteristics, a bulky briefcase of enormous size and a clerical collar projecting from his shabby black overcoat, soon revealed him to be none other than father z., an itinerant hungarian priest, whose calling involved frequent traveling in the countries of austria, switzerland and italy.

the visitor approached the table and solemnly bowed to the professor.
"laudetur jesus christus," [praise be to jesus christ] he said in the traditional manner of the latin greeting of the monastic clergy of hungary.
"in aeternum. amen," [in all eternity. amen.] the professor and his associate answered in the proper manner, while the visitor silently established himself in an empty seat at the table occupied by his compatriots. in hushed but discreetly audible tones, there now ensued a conversation of considerable length. the topic initially and understandably was of matters close at hand and dear to the anxious heart. the newest moves of the communist dictatorship in hungary were recounted; the most recent arrests of priests and nuns, the show-trials of members of the higher clergy, the capture and imprisonment of ill-fated friends and relatives. the whispered hopes of the exile community, the possible fall of the russian-supported tyranny due to political pressures from western nations, the hopes of the vatican, the vacillations of politicians the world over, the plight of the numerous refugees in camps and other facilities all over western europe - these and other related matters were recounted and discussed to the accompaniment of furrowed brows and distressed glances. finally, the urgencies having abated and anxious inquiries answered, it was time to attend to the long-awaited matter.

"my friend," the professor said, revealing a portentious deliberateness in his voice, "you have told me this morning of a small book by doctor jung. have you brought it along?"
father z. slowly and carefully unlocked his briefcase and began to search in its amply filled recesses. after a few minutes he drew forth a smallish volume and deposited it on the table where both the professor and his young friend could both view it with ease. the professor opened the volume and turned it at an angle where the light would illumine the pages in the most efficient manner. all three men looked with rapt attention. before them reposed an expensively bound small book, printed in highly decorative type on parchment-like artistic paper. the initial letters of the short chapters resembled nothing more than the elaborate initials in medieval manuscripts, and the text on each page was enclused by a frame, leaving the margins of great width, whereon the page numbers were noted in roman numerals. the text of the book was in german, as one could note at a glance on account of the old-fashioned gothic german type, long since fallen into disuse. in spite of the german text, the book bore a latin title, elaborately and artistically lettered on the front page. it read:

VII SERMONES AD MORTUOS

the author was identified in a line below the title as BASILIDES, and the place of writing as ALEXANDRIA, THE CITY WHERE EAST AND WEST MEET.
the young man flushed and drew himself up as though he had been struck. laboriously and with bated breath, he asked the priest: "professor j. told us, and you seemed to agree, that the book was written by dr. jung. why is it then that it bears the name of basilides, the famous gnostic heretic of alexandria in egypt? are you sure you have the correct book?"
"yes, baron, it is the right book, the seven sermons to the dead. let me quickly tell you its history, so that you will understand. it was written by dr. carl jung in 1916 but was never published for the use of the public. this is a very rare copy from the edition printed privately by jung for the use of some of his closest friends. in fact, this volume was given by jung long ago to a doctor in holland, who before his death gave it to an italian prelate who was visiting the dutch church and who was most interested in psychology. the old monsignore, who is now at the vatican, gave it to me for very similar reasons. as you may have heard, dr. jung has a more than ordinary interest in the teachings of the old gnostics, and so he used the name of basilides as a nom de plume in this particular instance."
"he is not the only one with a fascination for the gnostics," smiled professor j. "the young baron is quite heretical himself. but let us look at the book further."
the text of the volume was most certainly as outlandish and fascinating as the title page promised. the first chapter, entitled "SERMO I," began with the ominous sentence in german:

DIE TOTEN KAMEN ZURUCK VON JERUSALEM, WO SIE NICHT FANDEN, WAS SIE SUCHTEN. SIE BEGEHRTEN BEI MIR EINLASS UND VERLANGTEN BEI MIR LEHRE UND SO LEHRTE ICH SIE:
HORET: ICH BEGINNE BEIM NICHTS, DAS NICHTS IST DASSELBE WIE DIE FULLE. IN DER UNENDLICHKEIT IST VOLL SO GUT WIE LEER. DAS NICHTS IST LEER UND VOLL. IHR KONNT AUCH EBENSO GUT ETWAS ANDERES VOM NICHTS SAGEN, Z.B.ES SEI WEISS ODER SCHWARZ ODER ES SEI NICHT, ODER ES SEI. EIN UNENDLICHES UND EWIGES HAT KEINE EIGENSHAFTEN, WEIL ES ALLE EIGENSCHAFTEN HAT...

THE DEAD CAME BACK FROM JERUSALEM, WHERE THEY DID NOT FIND WHAT THEY WERE SEEKING. THEY ASKED ADMITTANCE TO ME AND DEMANDED TO BE TAUGHT BY ME, AND THUS I TAUGHT THEM:
HEAR YE: I BEGIN WITH NOTHING. NOTHING IS THE SAME AS FULLNESS. IN THE ENDLESS STATE FULLNESS IS THE SAME AS EMPTINESS. THE NOTHING IS BOTH EMPTY AND FULL. ONE MAY JUST AS WELL STATE SOME OTHER THING ABOUT THE NOTHING, NAMELY, THAT IT IS WHITE OR THAT IT IS BLACK OR THAT IT EXISTS OR THAT IT EXISTS NOT. THAT WHICH IS ENDLESS AND ETERNAL HAS NO QUALITIES BECAUSE IT HAS ALL QUALITIES...

they read on in the first chapter, or sermon, until the young man addressed the professor: "what is all this obscurity? i recognize the word PLEROMA, the plenum of which the old gnostics wrote, and a few other ideas which i have seen expressed by the fathers who wrote about, or rather against the gnostics. i cannot understand this so-called sermon at all!"
the professor replied at once: "it is a description of the absolute, the indescribable. no wonder doctor jung has a difficult time with it. do you remember the mystical darkness intimated by dionysius the areopagite? or the poetic vagueness of the descriptions of meister eckhart? jung was no doubt confronted with a task which these earlier mystics had also encountered. read on!"
a page bearing the heading "SERMO III" arrested their attention next:

THE DEAD APPROACHED LIKE MIST OUT OF THE SWAMPS AND THEY SHOUTED: "SPEAK TO US FURTHER ABOUT THE HIGHEST GOD."
- ABRAXAS IS A GOD WHOM IT IS DIFFICULT TO KNOW. HIS POWER IS THE VERY GREATEST, BECAUSE MAN DOES NOT PERCEIVE IT ALL. MAN SEES THE SUMMUM BONUM OF THE SUN, AND ALSO THE INFINUM MALUM OF THE DEVIL, BUT ABRAXAS, HE DOES NOT SEE, FOR HE IS UNDEFINABLE LIFE ITSELF, WHICH IS THE MOTHER OF GOOD AND EVIL ALIKE.

professor j. interrupted the reading of the text. "oh yes - abraxas. the gnostic universal ruler, whose head is like that of a rooster. how much more colorful our holy pictures and statues would be if we had retained some of these strange gnostic deities. surely one gets tired even of the image of our lord jesus, especially here in austria, where he is always covered in gold leaf. but, never mind, jung has really got something with his description of the old rooster-god. i must say this is impressive poetry, to say the least! listen to this!"
and he read on, in a steady, though subdued voice:

HE IS FULLNESS, UNITING ITSELF WITH EMPTINESS.
HE IS THE SACRED WEDDING;
HE IS LOVE AND THE MURDER OF LOVE;
HE IS THE HOLY ONE AND THE BETRAYER.

HE IS THE BRIGHTEST LIGHT OF DAY AND THE DEEPEST NIGHT OF MADNESS.

TO SEE HIM MEANS BLINDNESS;
TO KNOW HIM IS SICKNESS;
TO WORSHIP HIM IS DEATH;
TO FEAR HIM IS WISDOM;
NOT TO RESIST HIM MEANS LIBERATION.

after a brief interval of silence, he once again began to read aloud:

SUCH IS THE TERRIBLE ABRAXAS.

HE IS THE MIGHTIES MANIFEST BEING, AND IN HIM CREATION BECOMES FRIGHTENED OF ITSELF.
HE IS THE REVEALED PROTEST OF CREATION AGAINST THE PLEROMA AND ITS NOTHINGNESS.
HE IS THE TERROR OF THE SON, WHICH HE FEELS AGAINST HIS MOTHER.
HE IS THE LOVE OF THE MOTHER FOR HER SON.
HE IS THE DELIGHT OF EARTH AND THE CRUELTY OF HEAVEN.
MAN BECOMES PARALYZED BEFORE HIS FACE.
BEFORE HIM THERE EXIST NEITHER QUESTION NOR ANSWER.
HE IS THE LIFE OF CREATION.
HE IS THE ACTIVITY OF DIFFERENTIATION.
HE IS THE LOVE OF MAN.
HE IS THE SPEECH OF MAN.
HE IS BOTH THE RADIANCE AND THE DARK SHADOW OF MAN.
HE IS DECEITFUL REALITY.

"this jung is truly a poet," the priestly bearer of large briefcases and rare books interjected. "this passage is worthy of goethe, or at least of our most philisophical hungarian poet, endre ady, who called god a terrible shark."
"shark or rooster, it is very much the same thing. god is terror and darkness just as much as he is love and light. how else can one explain auschwitz, and the torture chambers in siberia and in budapest managed by stalin and his servants?" professor j. shook his head, his long white hair rearranging itself in untidy waves over his forehead.
"but are these dark and horrible deeds not the province of the devil, rather than of god?" father z. asked.
"not at all, my friend. the swiss doctor rightly says in this little book that there are countless gods and devils. and incidentally, what is a devil anyway? the church calls him a fallen angel, and so he is. but where did he fall from? from god's kingdom of greatness, or from the PLEROMA or fullness, as it is called here. to fall means to descend, to come down from on high. so the devils are beings who have come down from god to the lowest of all levels of creation, called hell. some think that the word diabolos really means little god. these little evil gods may indeed be responsible for instigating some errors, but the final responsibility for all good and evil must devolve on god. and this is precisely why jung's abraxas is a more accurate image of god than the one we hold, when we follow st. thomas and our theologians, who say that evil is only an absence of good. the german and russian death camps and their authors are not merely lacking in good; they are evil."
it was time for the youngest of the threesome to cautiously chide his elder: "it seems, professor, that this time you are the one who speaks like a gnostic heretic. surely a god who is both evil and good at the same time would be a most unsatisfactory object of worship for the people"
"if under 'people' you mean the masses of believers, then you are of course correct. still, your gnostic friends of olden days would have said that knowledge of god is more important than knowledge of god, and in order to know god one must also know evil."
"i agree with you that this is what the gnostics would have said, but what do you say, professor?"
"i shall ask myself if what i would say is both wise and necessary. and so i will say nothing."
"still spoken like a jesuit," muttered father z., instantly regretting his impulsive statement.
"be it as it may, jesuits have been known to survive when most others succumb." the professor turned his attention once more to the book.

the survey of the book was nearing its end. the last chapter offered itself to the gaze of the three readers. entitled "SERMO VII" and bearing the page number XVII in roman numerals, it began with a huge illuminated initial which was a gothic letter D:

DES NACHTS ABER KAMEN DIE TOTEN WIEDER MIT KLAGLICHER GEBARDE UND SPRACHEN: NOCH EINES, WIR VERGASSEN DAVON ZU REDEN, LEHRE UNS VOM MENSCHEN...

AT NIGHT THE DEAD CAME BACK AGAIN AND AMIDST COMPLAINING SAID: "ONE MORE THING WE MUST KNOW, BECAUSE WE HAD FORGOTTEN TO DISCUSS IT: TEACH US CONCERNING MAN."

- MAN IS A PORTAL THROUGH WHICH ONE ENTERS FROM THE OUTER WORLD OF THE GODS, DEMONS AND SOULS, INTO THE INNER WORLD - FROM THE GREATER WORLD INTO THE SMALLER WORLD. SMALL AND INSIGNIFICANT IS MAN; ONE LEAVES HIM SOON BEGIND, AND THUS ONE ENTERS ONCE MORE INTO INFINITE SPACE, INTO THE MICROCOSM, INTO THE INNER ETERNITY.

IN IMMEASURABLE DISTANCE THERE GLIMMERS A SOLITARY STAR ON THE HIGHEST POINT OF HEAVEN. THIS IS THE ONLY GOD OF THIS LONELY ONE. THIS IS HIS WORLD, HIS PLEROMA, HIS DIVINITY.

IN THIS WORLD MAN IS ABRAXAS, WHO GIVES BIRTH TO AND DEVOURS HIS OWN WORLD.
THIS STAR IS MAN'S GOD AND GOAL.
IT IS HIS GUIDING DIVINITY: IN IT MAN FINDS REPOSE.

TO IT GOES THE LONG JOURNET OF THE SOUL AFTER DEATH; IN IT SHINE ALL THINGS WHICH OTHERWISE MIGHT KEEP MAN FROM THE GREATER WORLD WITH THE BRILLIANCE OF A GREAT LIGHT.

TO THIS ONE, MAN OUGHT PRAY.
SUCH A PRAYER INCREASES THE LIGHT OF THE STAR.
SUCH A PRAYER BUILDS A BRIDGE OVER DEATH.
IT INCREASES THE LIFE OF THE MICROCOSM; WHEN THE OUTER WORLD GROWS COLD, THIS STAR STILL SHINES.

THERE IS NOTHING THAT CAN SEPARATE MAN FROM HIS OWN GOD, IF MAN CAN ONLY TURN HIS GAZE AWAY FROM THE FIERY SPECTACLE OF ABRAXAS.

MAN HERE, GOD THERE. WEAKNESS AND INSIGNIFICANCE HERE, ETERNAL CREATIVE POWER THERE.
HERE IS BUT DARKNESS AND DAMP COLD. THERE ALL IS SUNSINE

UPON HEARING THIS THE DEAD FELL SILENT, AND THEY ROSE UP LIKE SMOKE RISES OVER THE FIRE OF THE SHEPHERD, WHO GUARDS HIS FLOCK BY NIGHT

the text ended with four lines of barbarous words, entitled "anagramma," indicating ostensibly an attempt on the part of dr. jung to disguise some secret and personal message, but possibly also containing a magical sequence of gnostic formulae in the manner frequently found in late egyptian sources.

the three readers glanced at each other in a uniformly significant fashion. a chill spirit of awe and amazement seemed to have risen at the table. even the owner of the book, whose acquaintance with its contents extended over a number of years, was visibly affected. no one spoke for several minutes.

the silence was broken by professor j.: "dr. jung is a seer and a mystic after the fashion of the magicians of the renaissance. i have known for some time that there is more to him than meets the academic eye. unlike freud, he is not fearful of the dark mysteries of the spirit. among his friends and supporters are people of unconventional and peculiar affiliations and interests. i hear that one of his italian pupils is a theosophist, while an english follower, who is also a doctor, became a devotee of a russian wizard. there must also be some contact between him and the group founded by the austrian mystic rudolf steiner, whose headquarters is in switzerland. it is known to most of us that dr. jung was fascinated by the phenomena of spiritism and that he got his doctorate by writing a thesis on occult phenomena. some think that he is a spiritual pagan, while others accuse him of being biased in the direction of christianity. this little book would set both of those opinions in the wrong, for it shows that he is a kind of gnostic, which would take him out of the categories of pagan and christian. i am certainly pleased to have perused this remarkable document, and i am thankful to you father."

the mild-mannered priest barely had opportunity to acknowledge the professor's comments when their younger companion burst into the conversation with even more than his usual ardor: "and i am truly thankful beyond measure and beyond words also. i am greatly concerned, however, since i recall that you said to us that this book is quite unobtainable. i wish i could memorize its contents by heart so as to retain every word. if i ever encountered a book i should like to own, this is assuredly the one!"
"it may not be necessary to thus tax your memory, baron, for i am not leaving innsbruck until tomorrow night, and you may be able to copy these few pages without much difficulty by then. just be so kind and return the book to me before five o'clock tomorrow. i am lodged at the franciscan monastery, not far from here."

he handed the book to his happy compatriot, who with trembling hand grasped it and carefully hid it in the inner pocket of his overcoat. "i will copy it tonight. you may have it as early as you wish, even before morning mass."

outside, the early darkness of winter had fallen. the reading room had become well-nigh empty of patrons, and the librarian was obviously preparing to close the doors. after polite expressions of good wishes, the three companions donned their coats and other protective clothing and exited from the premises. the winter evening received them in due fashion, and after a short walk together they dispersed to take up their individual journeys to their previous quarters. a remarkable day had come to a close.

not quite. one of the company was certainly not prepared to see his day come to a close. no knight of the round table could have carried the holy grail with greater reverence than the hungarian student carried that copy of jung's seven sermons to the dead. the cold and slow-moving streetcar, the walk from the termincal to his quarters in an outlying district of the city, the frantic preparations involving the securing of adequate quantities of paper and of a sturdy fountain pen - these activities took on the nimbus of events on a journey to a place where a lifetime of toil and expectancy would be rewarded and crowned. the kitchen, hallowed locale of culinary alchemical operations, was speedily turned into a nocturnal scriptorium, and the enthusiastic scribe plunged with utmost dedication unto one of the most magical activities of his young life.

page upon page of carefully written script came to repose on the massive kitchen table, the prized possession of the aged landlady, who was wont to utilize it for innumerable useful tasks, from the matutinal brushing of her dog's fur to the preparation and serving of several daily meals and the ironing of clothing, to the frequent nocturnal card games, played with the medieval tarock cards, a variant of the magical deck known as tarot. yet never had this venerable table witnessed greater diligence and more fervent devotion.

it was well past midnight when the task was completed. soon it was time to rise once again and to rush to the monastery of the franciscans, attending early mass, and after the conclusion of the same handing the precious volume over to the somewhat groggy father z. in the door of the sacristy.

the work was finished, but the mystery had just begun. an inescapable world of shadows had entered the daylight world of ordinary life.

the time passed and the world changed, the seven sermons remained an object of wonder and interest to their one-time scribe. thirteen years later, in distant california, the dead "came back" to their enthusiastic admirer once more. they did not come from jerusalem but from zurich, and they appeared in a book then just issued by the publishing house rascher verlag under the title erinnerungen traume gedanken von c.g. jung (memories, dreams, reflections by c.g. jung). a german prepublication copy having been presented to him by a swiss friend, our protagonist quickly discovered that the appendix of this book contained the german text of the mysterious sermons. the page introducing the sermons contained an ominous footnote: "to be published only in the german edition." once again the enthusiasm of the scribe rose to a great pitch. the suggestion came to his mind with some force that the german text ought to be made available to many good people who read only english, but who should not be deprived of this experience for that reason. now came another somewhat less romantic but still intriguing piece of work, which consisted of his translation of the text into english from the german original. this translation came to be privately printed and distributed to a select number of personal friends, much like the original german edition had been distributed by jung himself. by this time, of course, the wise old man of zurich and kusnack had departed from the stage of his earthly career. his personality, still subject to speculation and obscure gossip, had already emerged with far greater clarity than had been the case earlier. jungian psychology was slowly gathering momentum outside of the german-speaking world, and its founder's unconventional spiritual intersts were already in part documented by the appearence of his great works on alchemy, and by his gnostic assault on conventional theology in his answer to job.

the translation of the seven sermons remained a private concern, however, and it remained as a text to be studied by a small number of persons whose interests were in the fields of gnosticism and of the psychology of jung. for some years it was the only such translation, and an unknown one at that. another small piece of work was finished, but the mystery continued and the world of shadows grew longer.

time passed again and the world changed even more than before. the 1960's and most of the 1970's passed, and with them came an era of turbulence and much spiritual creativity. the viet nam war was lost (the only war ever lost by the united states of amerikkka), but the war against trivial consciousness and the small-souledness of modern western culture was almost won. the children's crusade of what some were pleased to call the age of aquarius, not unlike earlier crusades, temporarily liberated the holy sepulchre wherein the saving power of the spirit reposed. the wide-eyed children of the new age rolled away the stone and proclaimed that an ineffable greatness had risen. a rough but glorious beast, once foretold by the poet yeats, slouched closer to bethlehem to be born. the minstrels sang: "the times, they're a changing," and they did change. the wings of angels were in the air.

in these new times, dr. jung came ever more into his own. though for long physically removed, his presence came to be felt increasingly year by year. the psychologists and psychiatrists continued to play the games of freud and skinner, delighting in the libido and in the mazes of neurotic rats, but the world of literature, mythology, poetry and of such culture as there still remained in an increasingly uneducated world became more and more aware of jung. jung had become more important than his therapy, more important even than his analytical psychology, and curiously enough, this circumstance seemed quite just and right.

along with the rise of jung and of other previously arcane figures and subjects, the world also saw a modest renaissance of interest in gnosticism, the old spiritual discipline with which jung associated himself in the seven sermons. long-buried codices came to light in egypt which arrested the attention of many scholars and of even more imaginative and creative lay persons. words and names such as PLEROMA, ABRAXAS and BASILIDES were no longer totally foreign to a fair number of insightful and creative folk. the time of jung and of the gnostics had come. the time for the seven sermons to the dead had come.

it was thus that the dead came back once more from jerusalem and demanded attention. thirty years had taken their toll among the agents of the original small drama, which was instrumental in establishing the link between the sermons and the person who once devotedly copied them without any foreknowledge of their future use. the noble figure of professor j. has departed the academy of earth. it was reported that his heart was broken by the disastrous failure of the patriotic uprising of his people in 1956, which he had anxiously observed from his later place of exile in munich in bavaria. father z, the bearer of the book, had also died, much as he lived, unobtrusively and modestly, a humble worker in an alien vineyard. the exile continued, mirroring perhaps the greater exile referred to by the ancient gnostics - the exile of the lightsparks from the fullness of light. far from the tyrolean alps where he first confronted them, the once-young scribe continued to be haunted by the dead and by the sermons delivered to them by basilides the wise. the encouragement of new companions in a new world had fanned the flame kindled on a wintry afternoon long ago and far away. and so three decades after the original events here recounted, the gnosis of dr. jung, as enunciated in his seven sermons, is now made available to a larger circle.

in every age of human history there were individuals who were imbued with an especial quality of knowing, or gnosis. carl jung was such a man. this knowing, as he repeatedly stated, could not be found in the available traditions of the science and religion of his day, or of any day. there was only one way open, one option left; jung had to undergo the original experience. this experience of gnosis, the urerfahrung (archaic, or source-experience), as he called it, led him to the shadow world of basilides and the questioning dead. even while living in the bright daylight world of his earliest years, he never could escape a condition which he later described as a premonition of an inescapable world of shadows. this premonition is assuredly not a unique experience of jung but is shared in common to a degree by all humanity. the gnostic nature of the human vocation is evidenced by the presence, in all persons, of a sense of this world of shadows. in spite of its non-rationality and improbability, the transcendent element of an inward gnosis is indelibly inscribed in the human heart; all the trivialities of the everyday world due to inattention and consequent ignorance are unable to extinguish its rememberance. the denial of gnosis only secretly affirms its power. as meister eckhart put it, "the more man blasphemes the more he praises god."

the state of forgetfulness of gnosis always carries with it a troublesome sense of privation, which will not be stilled until its one true object - instead of the many false and counterfeit ones - has been found again. the ancient gnostics, from whose shadowland jung brought forth the seven sermons, often said that all the desires persons feel, all their attempts to gain excitement, happiness and love from this thing or that experience, are but signs of a never-failing homesickness for the pleroma, the 'fullness of being,' which is the soul's true homeland. only those who have found the way home can show it to others. a man who missed his own way makes a poor guide. the egalitarian contention that holds that the uninformed can render service to the world as long as they are well intentioned is vitated by this fact. in the long run, only those who know can offer useful service, for they are the ones who know the road by having walked it.

c.g. jung was a healer of souls and a healer of the culture. a more efficient servant of humanity the world has seldom seen. this efficiency and wisdom was the result, not of heredity, environment, education, but of having walked the road to the land of shadows where the secret knowledge of the sould dwells. to walk this road, and to find one's objective, means to go contrary to the world and to the notions of the reasonable and the probable. jung once wrote that our picture of the world only tallies with reality when the improbable has a place in it. it is improbable that order will prevail against chaos and that meaning will win out over meaninglessness. still, the improbable happens; it is possible and not beyond our reach. in a very real sense the improbable is the true vocation, the authentic destiny of the human being. this is the vocation that can be said to make us human, for we are less than human in proportion as we disregard it or ignore it. the trees and flowers, the birds and beasts who follow their destiny are superior to the human who betrays his.

the present prologue, now at an end, is in the nature of a personal statement. to its writer, the seven sermons and the manner in which he once discovered them, were and remain a grand symbol of a curious destiny, at once deeply personal and totally universal. life was not, could not be the same after that magical moment in the cozy reading room in the cold and snowy city in the alps. like a volume of sacred scripture or a codex of transformative formulae of power, the transcribed words of the mysterious little book changed the course of a life. the safe harbor of orthodoxy had lost all its attractiveness, and with it the establishments of a time-honored belief and tradition. the loss of conventional faith and loyalties might well have brough with it the signs of spiritual rootlessness, so characteristic of those who substitute thought for faith and search for tradition. how readily one may condemn oneself at such a time to the fate of the flying dutchman and sail the ocean of life endlessly to and fro, terrified by its gales and bewitched by its calms, while always seeking a harbor which is never found! such could not be the fate of one who was touched by the spirit of jung and of the gnostics; such will not be the fate of anyone who enters the enchanted world of archetypical shadows armed with the sword of gnosis. from a premonition, life created a realization and an experiance. it is often thus; the realities, which at first are but an intriguing but distant vision, prove to be closer at hand than one dreamt. they are "closer than your jugular vein," as the prophet of islam expressed it, speaking with the terse eloquence of the desert. the inescapable world of shadows is present in everyone's room, as certainly as it was present in jung's. the only pity is that for too many it remains forever invisible. to those, however, who in vision and dream, in the magic synchronicities of the daylight, or in the dark wizardry of sleep, have effectively contacted these shadows, they not only retain their visibility, but they become in very truth the wellsprings of existence itself. it was perhaps this imperative quality of the shadow world that jung wished to express when he said to laurens van der post: "the dream is like a woman. it will have the last word as it had the first."

a prologue is defined as the first word. in another sense it must be the last, for in it ought to be summed up the alpha and omega of the work which follow. wherher these lines succeed in accomplishing this is not for the writer to judge. all he can do is to nourish the hope that the reader will have received a premonition of the frame of mind or tone of spirit which served as the moving force of this work. jung said that only a poet could begin to understand him, and so it may be fitting to conclude with some lined from the poet a.e., another wanderer in the strange land of gnosis:

OUT OF A TIMELESS WORLD
SHADOWS FALL UPON TIME,
FROM A BEAUTY OLDER THAN EARTH,
A LADDER THE SOUL MAY CLIMB.
I CLIMB BY THE FANTOM STAIR
TO A WHITENESS OLDER THAN TIME.
